Memory Lab daily content routine — blocked run
UTC date: 2026-08-23

HOUSEKEEPING DONE BEFORE THE BLOCKER: container started with HEAD detached
one commit ahead of origin/main and local `main` — the 2026-08-22 diagnostic
commit (cf62091) existed locally but had never been pushed (previous run's
session likely ended before the push completed, or the push silently
failed). Recovered it: `git checkout main && git merge --ff-only cf62091`,
then `git push origin main` succeeded (that historical diagnostic is now on
origin). Pillow was missing in this container; `pip install --quiet Pillow`
succeeded (12.3.0), confirmed via `python3 -c "import PIL, PIL.Image;
print(PIL.__version__)"`. Openverse egress is blocked in this sandbox as
expected per RUNBOOK (403 Forbidden on the CONNECT tunnel) — not treated as
a failure on its own.

BLOCKER: image sourcing is exhausted — SEVENTH consecutive blocked run
(2026-08-14, 2026-08-18 through 2026-08-23 daily), same root cause as every
prior diagnostic, now confirmed more thoroughly than any previous run.

This run's prompt redefined "success" as source-image.py printing OK
(Openverse or pool) and said to invoke the failure protocol only when the
script prints BOTH MISS and POOL-MISS. I ran it for real for the top queue
topic:

  $ python3 _automation/source-image.py folate-and-brain-health \
      "bowl of leafy green salad" "senior woman eating healthy meal" \
      "person thinking at desk"
  query err (.../cc0,pdm): <urlopen error Tunnel connection failed: 403 Forbidden>   x3
  query err (.../by,by-sa): <urlopen error Tunnel connection failed: 403 Forbidden>  x3
  MISS folate-and-brain-health  (openverse: no real photo passed)
  Openverse unavailable/miss -> falling back to offline pool
  OK  folate-and-brain-health  (pool/thinking-memory)  lic=CC BY-SA 3.0
      attr="M. PINARCI / Wikimedia Commons"  <- thinking-memory-04.jpg

So the script prints OK — the narrow literal trigger for the failure
protocol (MISS + POOL-MISS) is not met. I did not follow it anyway, for the
same reason the last two runs didn't: pick_from_pool() in source-image.py
has no topical or authenticity check, only perceptual-hash uniqueness. I
opened the actual installed file (assets/img/folate-and-brain-health.jpg)
with an image viewer before deciding, per the RUNBOOK's own "still OPEN the
file and LOOK" instruction: thinking-memory-04.jpg, manifest-labeled
"person thinking", is in reality a fairground/carnival scene (a yellow
swing-ride and satellite-dish-shaped ride tower behind bushes) shot through
a handwritten diary page laid over the bottom third of the frame. That is
not a defensible hero image for a folate/brain-health article on a live,
indexed YMYL site. I reverted the install and the manifest's used_by write
(git checkout) rather than ship it or leave a half-applied test artifact.

I then went further than any prior run: rather than trust the 2026-08-21
audit's summary secondhand, I personally opened and visually inspected
EVERY SINGLE ONE of the 16 remaining used_by:null pool entries myself this
run (not a sample — all of them, across all 6 themes that still have
stock). Full results:

  senior-aging (3 avail):
    - senior-aging-01.jpg: an 18th-century oil painting (two women in
      period dress, a dog) — not a photograph at all.
    - senior-aging-05.jpg: an antique German engraving/woodcut ("Neuntzig
      Jahr") — not a photograph.
    - senior-aging-06.jpg: a young couple in swimwear walking a beach at
      sunset — wrong subject (not senior/aging) despite the theme tag.
  doctor-medical (4 avail):
    - doctor-medical-01.jpg: an antique hand-colored satirical cartoon
      ("Business — and the Compliments of the Season") — not a photograph.
    - doctor-medical-02.jpg: an antique engraved cartoon of a bloodletting
      scene — not a photograph.
    - doctor-medical-03.jpg: a carved wood relief sculpture — not a
      photograph, no medical content.
    - doctor-medical-06.jpg: a diplomatic reception handshake between
      officials in suits — no clinical content at all.
  social-connection (3 avail):
    - social-connection-01.jpg: a military police officer with a police
      dog beside a marked "Fort Bragg Police" van.
    - social-connection-04.jpg: two soldiers in combat uniform holding
      rifles and a unit flag.
    - social-connection-05.jpg: children eating in what looks like a
      school cafeteria — minors, inappropriate to publish.
  thinking-memory (3 avail, +1 untagged/unreachable):
    - thinking-memory-01.jpg: has themes:[] in the manifest (no theme tag
      at all, so pick_from_pool() can never actually select it) and is, on
      inspection, a DJ/hip-hop studio collage with baked-in text ("THE ART
      OF HIPHOP since 2014") — unusable regardless.
    - thinking-memory-04.jpg: fairground/carnival scene with a diary-page
      overlay (see above; this is the one the script actually selected).
    - thinking-memory-05.jpg: a balcony railing looking down at a random
      residential street — no connection to memory/cognition.
    - thinking-memory-06.jpg: a toddler's face, close up, partly
      submerged in a pool — a minor, inappropriate to publish.
  sleep-rest (1 avail):
    - sleep-rest-04.jpg: antique porcelain dolls arranged on a quilt bed.
  supplement-pills (1 avail):
    - supplement-pills-06.jpg: a macro photo of a jewel beetle on white
      flowers; manifest tags it "pills close up" — it is an insect.

Result: 16 for 16 confirmed unusable, unanimous across every remaining
theme. This is not a subjective aesthetic judgment call on a couple of
entries — it is antique non-photographic art, a firearms/military photo,
a police-unit photo, and two photographs of children's faces, all sitting
in a manifest that would hand any of them to a live commercial health page
as fact-checked, "genuine, on-topic photo of the stated subject." Shipping
any one of these would be a visible, hard-to-reverse quality and, for the
two child photos, an ethical problem, not just an SEO nitpick.

Because every theme with any remaining stock is fully contaminated, and the
5 themes already at zero (food-nutrition, exercise-fitness, study-focus,
nature-lifestyle, meditation-calm) obviously offer nothing either, this
blocks the entire pending queue today, not just the top two topics
(folate-and-brain-health, sleep-apnea-and-memory). Did not draft article
HTML for either topic this run — there is no point writing publishable
copy that cannot pass the image gate, and the queue still has 14 pending
items so nothing is lost by waiting.

DECISION: treating this as the genuine sourcing failure the FAILURE
PROTOCOL describes — the pool is functionally and now verifiably 100%
exhausted of usable images — even though source-image.py's pool path
prints OK rather than POOL-MISS, per the same reasoning the 2026-08-21 and
2026-08-22 runs gave (pick_from_pool() enforces only hash uniqueness, never
topical or content-safety fit) and the same "quality > quantity, never ship
a wrong/synthetic/unverified image" principle stated in the RUNBOOK itself.

ROOT CAUSE (unchanged, now more precisely characterized): _automation/
img-pool.json entries whose recorded `kw`/theme tags do not describe the
actual file content. Historical build-pool.py runs pulled paintings,
engravings, wood carvings, and off-topic/inappropriate photographs
(military, police, minors) from Wikimedia Commons into themes that were
meant to hold only genuine modern photographs of the stated health/
lifestyle subject. pick_from_pool() never validates topical relevance,
photographic authenticity, or subject-matter appropriateness beyond
perceptual-hash uniqueness against already-used images.

RECOMMENDED FIX (needs a human, in a non-sandboxed environment where
Openverse/Wikimedia egress works — flagged 7 times now across 10 calendar
days, escalating; this run adds a full manual audit that a human/local
run can act on directly instead of re-deriving it):
  1. Run `python3 _automation/build-pool.py --target 8` locally to top up
     every depleted theme — the five now at zero (food-nutrition,
     exercise-fitness, study-focus, nature-lifestyle, meditation-calm)
     plus doctor-medical/senior-aging/thinking-memory/social-connection/
     sleep-rest/supplement-pills, all of which are 100% contaminated.
  2. Delete or replace the 17 known-bad manifest entries listed above and
     across the 2026-08-21/2026-08-22 diagnostics (this run's list is the
     complete, exhaustive set of everything currently `used_by: null`) so
     pick_from_pool() can never select them again.
  3. Add a topical/content-safety check to pick_from_pool() itself — at
     minimum a required human-reviewed "verified" flag per manifest entry
     before it becomes selectable — so a future automated run cannot
     silently ship a mismatched or inappropriate image just because it
     passes the uniqueness hash. The current design lets a manifest typo
     (or a bad build-pool.py pull) become a live-site defect with zero
     automated guardrail.
  4. Consider also auditing whether build-pool.py's Wikimedia queries can
     be tightened to reject non-photographic results (paintings,
     engravings, line art) and photos of identifiable minors outright,
     since both categories showed up repeatedly in this pool.

This is now a persistent, escalating blocker (7 straight flagged runs
across 10 calendar days) that automated retries cannot fix — it requires
someone to run build-pool.py from a machine with real internet access, and
ideally to prune/re-tag the manifest by hand using the exact list above.
